
1 diff between authorization and authentication.

       Authentication:

       Purpose: Verifies who the user is.
       means the person who is looking for the access, he needs authentication using username password and other things.
  
       Authorization:

       Purpose: Determines what the user is allowed to do.
       means who gives the access or allowed to do anything.


2 what is IAM..?

      IAM (Identity and Access Management) 
      In short, IAM ensures that the right people have the right access to the right resources.


3. Instance type in AWS.

      In AWS, an instance type defines the hardware specifications (such as CPU, memory, storage, and networking capacity) 
      of a virtual server (called an EC2 instance) that you can launch in the cloud.
  
      Choosing the right instance type depends on:

      Workload: Whether it's CPU, memory, or storage-intensive.
      Cost: Some instance types are more expensive based on their specifications.
      Performance: Choose an instance that matches your performance requirements for a given application.


4.  Different way to connect with ec2.

    1. SSH (Secure Shell) for Linux/Unix-based EC2 Instances
    What it is: SSH is a protocol used to securely connect to a Linux/Unix-based EC2 instance.
    How to use:
    Ensure you have the private key (.pem file) associated with the EC2 instance.
    Open a terminal or command prompt.

    2. EC2 Instance Connect (Browser-based SSH for Linux)

    3. Third-Party Tools (e.g., PuTTY, MobaXterm for SSH)


5. region vs availibility zones.

   Definition: A Region is a geographically isolated location that contains multiple data centers.

   Definition: An Availability Zone is a physically isolated data center within a region. Each region typically contains multiple Availability Zones.


6.list of globel services in AWS.


1. Amazon Route 53
Service Type: Domain Name System (DNS) and Domain Registration
Amazon Route 53 is a scalable and highly available Domain Name System (DNS) web service provided by Amazon Web Services
(AWS). It is designed to route end-user requests to various internet resources, such as websites, web applications,

2. AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM)
Service Type: Security and Access Management
Description: Manages user access to AWS services and resources across all regions. IAM policies, roles, and users are global.

3. Amazon CloudFront
Service Type: Content Delivery Network (CDN)
Amazon CloudFront is a Content Delivery Network (CDN) that helps deliver your content, such as websites, images, videos, and apps, to users faster. 
It works by copying your content to servers (called edge locations) around the world.
When someone requests your content, CloudFront sends it from the nearest server

4. Amazon S3 (with Global S3 Access Points)
Amazon S3 (Simple Storage Service) is a cloud storage service provided by Amazon Web Services (AWS)
that allows you to store and retrieve any amount of data at any time from anywhere on the web.

5. AWS CloudTrail
Amazon CloudTrail is a service provided by AWS that helps you monitor and log all the activities and API calls made in your AWS account.
It automatically records detailed information about every action taken on AWS resources, such as who did what and when.

6. Amazon SNS (Simple Notification Service)
Service Type: Messaging and Notification
Description: A fully managed messaging service for sending notifications globally, including email, SMS, and other protocols.

7. Amazon CloudWatch
Amazon CloudWatch is a monitoring and observability service provided by AWS that helps you track the performance, 
health, and activity of your AWS resources and applications in real-time.

CloudTrail focuses on tracking API calls and providing an audit trail of actions in your AWS account.

CloudWatch focuses on monitoring the health and performance of your AWS resources, providing metrics, logs, and alarms.


7. what is elastic ip.

   elastic ip is used to get a permanent ip adress of any server to ensure high availibility of the server.


8. what is auto scalling.

   auto scalling help you to ensure high availibility of the server it will automatically scale-up and scale-down the server and resources according to the workload and performance.


9. load balancer and its type.

A Load Balancer is a service that automatically distributes incoming traffic across multiple servers 
or resources to ensure high availability, reliability, and optimal performance of your application

Application Load Balancer (ALB):

Sends web traffic to the right server based on the URL (like sending image requests to one server and API requests to another).

Network Load Balancer (NLB):

Sends fast traffic (like games or streaming) to the right server.

Classic Load Balancer (CLB):

Old load balancer that just sends regular traffic to servers.


10. ALB vs NLB

ALB is for web traffic with complex routing (like websites).
NLB is for high-speed, real-time traffic (like gaming or video streaming).


11. security groups vs NACL

Security Groups are used for instance-level security, allowing only specified inbound traffic, while automatically handling return traffic.

NACLs Network Access Control Lists are used for subnet-level security, allowing more granular control with both allow and deny rules for traffic in and out of the subnet.


12. S3 Object Lifecycle:

Lifecycle policies let you automatically manage your data:

Transition: Move data to cheaper storage after a certain time (e.g., from Standard to Glacier).
Expiration: Automatically delete data after a set time.


13. AMI vs SNAPSHOT

AMI An AMI is a pre-configured image based on existing image we use ami for a reapititive task like if we want to use all the configuration of a instance in future for that
we can create the AMI based on that instance,

SNAPSHOT it is used for the backup up EBS volume of the instance the EBS volume of the instance we can take manually or we can take on a perticulor time for that we use
 lifecycle policy for the taking the snapshot daily.


14. what is ECS 

Amazon ECS (Elastic Container Service) is a fully managed container orchestration service provided 
by AWS (Amazon Web Services) that allows you to easily run, manage, and scale containerized applications on AWS. 


15. RDS service  realtional database service

database - it is collection of tables
table - it is collection of rows and collumbs 

RDS is used to your database service. For database engine we need rds service

It supports multiple database engines like MySQL, SQL Server, Oracle, and Amazon Aurora, 


 mysql - it is structured quaery language. it uses tables to store the data.
   - The INSERT INTO statement is used to add new records to a table. 
   - The UPDATE statement is used to modify existing records in a table. 
   - The DELETE statement is used to remove records from a table.
   - The CREATE TABLE statement is used to create a new table in a database.
   - The DROP TABLE statement is used to delete a table and all its data.
   - The JOIN clause is used to combine rows from two or more tables, based on a related column.

Oracle- Oracle Database is a powerful system used to store and manage large amounts of data.
             Oracle is often used in large businesses because it ensures data is safe, organized, and easily accessible.


Amazon DynamoDB is ideal for applications that require fast, flexible, and scalable database solutions. It's commonly used for web and mobile applications, 
e-commerce platforms, IoT systems, real-time data processing, gaming, and more. 
 

mongodb MongoDB is a popular NoSQL database that is designed to store large amounts of data in a flexible, scalable.



16. what is cloudformation and stack in cloudformation.

it is used to provisioning the AWS resources, we can provisioning only AWS resources using cloudFormation.

Infrastructure as Code (IaC): Define your infrastructure in code, which can be version-controlled and reused.

Automated Provisioning: Automatically creates, updates, and deletes AWS resources based on your templates.


stack in cloudformation 

   A CloudFormation Stack is essentially a collection of AWS resources
   
   if you have a CloudFormation template that defines an EC2 instance, an S3 bucket, and a security group, these resources will be grouped into a stack. 
   If you need to make changes to the resources (e.g., update an EC2 instance type or add a new S3 bucket), you can modify the template and update the entire stack.

 Resources:
  MyEC2Instance:
    Type: AWS::EC2::Instance
    Properties:
      InstanceType: t2.micro
      ImageId: ami-0c55b159cbfafe1f0
      KeyName: my-key-pair



17. cloud deployment models
  
public 
private 
hybrid and 
community cloud.


18 cloud service model.

Iaas   You manage: The operating system, applications, and data.
paas   You manage: Your applications and data.
saas   You manage: Nothing. You just use the application.


19. what is amazon resource name 

 an ARN is just a way to name and find things in AWS.



20.  CNAME (Canonical Name) 


It’s commonly used to alias one domain name to another


21.  What is AAA in aws 

Authentication verifies who you are.
Authorization defines what you can do.
Accounting tracks what you did and when.


22. what is AWS secret manager.
    it is used to secure save and retrive the credentials and sensitive data.

23. AWS CLI 

The AWS CLI is a powerful tool that allows you to manage AWS resources from the command line,


24. what is vpc and its components.?

A VPC (Virtual Private Cloud) is like your own private network in the AWS cloud where you can run your applications and store data securely.

Main parts of a VPC:
Subnets: Small sections of your VPC where you place resources. Some can connect to the internet (public), and some stay private (not connected to the internet).

IP Range (CIDR Block): The range of IP addresses your VPC can use (like 10.0.0.0/16).

Route Tables: Rules that control how traffic moves in and out of your VPC.

Internet Gateway: A connection that allows your VPC to talk to the internet.

NAT Gateway/Instance: Allows private resources to access the internet without being publicly visible.

Security Groups: Firewalls that control which traffic is allowed to reach your resources.


25. diff b/w roles and policies.?

Roles:
A Role is like a set of permissions that you can assign to an AWS resource (such as an EC2 instance, Lambda function, or user).

Policies:
A Policy is a document that defines what actions are allowed or denied on specific AWS resources.


26. types of scalling of ec2 in aws

Vertical Scaling: Change the size of a single instance.
Horizontal Scaling: Add or remove multiple instances to handle traffic.


27 access controle list vs bucket policy

ACL is basic and works for specific users or objects.
Bucket Policy is more advanced, applies to the whole bucket, and can include complex rules.


28. edge location.

An Edge Location in AWS is a location where AWS CloudFront caches content for fast delivery to users. 


29. what is ssl and tls certificates.

SSL (Secure Sockets Layer):
SSL is the older protocol that was originally used to secure communications between web browsers and servers.

TLS Transport Layer Security is modern protocall it is more secure version of SSL.

SSL/TLS certificates help keep your data safe when browsing by securing the communication between your browser and a website.


30 EBS vs EFS

EBS is for single-instance storage, while EFS is for shared storage across multiple instances at a same time.


EBS

Use: Attach to a single EC2 instance for fast, high-performance storage.


EFS

Use: Shared storage that can be accessed by multiple EC2 instances at the same time.























